Add docs for lightweight deletes (#41121)
ClickHouse/ClickHouse: docs/en/sql-reference/statements/delete.md

---
slug: /en/sql-reference/statements/delete
sidebar_position: 36
sidebar_label: DELETE
---

# DELETE Statement

``` sql
DELETE FROM [db.]table [WHERE expr]
```

> For MergeTree tables, `DELETE FROM` performs a lightweight delete on the given table, which means that the deleted rows are marked as deleted immediately and deleted rows will be filtered out of all subsequent queries. The underlying data is permanently deleted whenever merges occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DELETE FROM` removes rows from table `[db.]table` that match expression `expr`. The deleted rows are marked as deleted immediately and will be automatically filtered out of all subsequent queries. Cleanup of data happens asynchronously in background. This feature is only available for MergeTree table engine family.
```

For example, the following query deletes all rows from the `hits` table where the `Title` column contains the text `hello`:

```sql
DELETE FROM hits WHERE Title LIKE '%hello%';
```

:::note
This feature is experimental and requires you to set `allow_experimental_lightweight_delete` to true:

```sql
SET allow_experimental_lightweight_delete = true;
```

:::

> The [traditional way to delete rows](./alter/delete.md) in ClickHouse was to use `ALTER TABLE ... DELETE`, which is still a valid method for deleting rows. However, in most use cases the new lightweight `DELETE FROM` behavior will be considerably faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An [alternative way to delete rows](./alter/delete.md) in ClickHouse is `ALTER TABLE ... DELETE`, which might be more efficient if you do bulk deletes only occasionally and don't need the operation to be applied instantly. In most use cases the new lightweight `DELETE FROM` behavior will be considerably faster.
```

Reviewer: the really traditional way is https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/replacingmergetree

```

`DELETE FROM` removes rows from table `[db.]table` that match expression `expr`. The deleted rows are marked as deleted immediately and will be automatically filtered out of all subsequent queries. Cleanup of data happens asynchronously in background. This feature is only available for MergeTree table engine family.

For example, the following query deletes all rows from the `hits` table where the `Title` column contains the text `hello`:

```sql
DELETE FROM hits WHERE Title LIKE '%hello%';
```

Lightweight deletes are asynchronous by default. Set `mutations_sync` equal to 1 to wait for one replica to process the statement, and set `mutations_sync` to 2 to wait for all replicas.

:::note
This feature is experimental and requires you to set `allow_experimental_lightweight_delete` to true:

```sql
SET allow_experimental_lightweight_delete = true;
```

:::

An [alternative way to delete rows](./alter/delete.md) in ClickHouse is `ALTER TABLE ... DELETE`, which might be more efficient if you do bulk deletes only occasionally and don't need the operation to be applied instantly. In most use cases the new lightweight `DELETE FROM` behavior will be considerably faster.

:::warn

> Even though deletes are becoming more lightweight in ClickHouse, they should still not be used as aggressively as on OLTP system. Ligthweight deletes are currently efficient for wide parts, but for compact parts they can be a heavyweight operation, and it may be better to use `ALTER TABLE` for some scenarios.

Reviewer 2: Can you define "wide" here? I'd like to know what's wide and what's not.

Thanks
